Vignette typo patch (#5402)
Rdatatable/data.table: vignettes/datatable-benchmarking.Rmd

sudo hdparm -t /dev/sda
```

> When comparing `fread` to non-R solutions be aware that R requires values of character columns to be added to _R's global string cache_. This takes time when reading data but later operations benefit since the character strings have already been cached. Consequently, as well timing isolated tasks (such as `fread` alone), it's a good idea to benchmark a pipeline of tasks such as reading data, computing operators and producing final output and report the total time of the pipeline.

Reviewer: as well as?

> When comparing `fread` to non-R solutions be aware that R requires values of character columns to be added to _R's global string cache_. This takes time when reading data but later operations benefit since the character strings have already been cached. Consequently, as well as timing isolated tasks (such as `fread` alone), it's a good idea to benchmark a pipeline of tasks such as reading data, computing operators and producing final output and report the total time of the pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When comparing `fread` to non-R solutions be aware that R requires values of character columns to be added to _R's global string cache_. This takes time when reading data but later operations benefit since the character strings have already been cached. Consequently, in addition to timing isolated tasks (such as `fread` alone), it's a good idea to benchmark the total time of an end-to-end pipeline of tasks such as reading data, manipulating it, and producing final output.
```

options(datatable.use.index=TRUE)
```

> - `use.index=FALSE` will force query not to use indices even if they exist, but existing keys are still used for optimization.

Reviewer: will force the query?

options(datatable.optimize=3L)
```
`options(datatable.optimize=2L)` will turn off optimization of subsets completely, while `options(datatable.optimize=3L)` will switch it back on.

> Those options affect many more optimizations thus should not be used when only control of index is needed. Read more in `?datatable.optimize`.

Reviewer: These options affect many more optimizations and this... control of the index

# _by reference_ operations

> When benchmarking `set*` functions it makes sense to measure only first run. Those functions update data.table by reference thus in subsequent runs they get already processed `data.table` on input.

Reviewer: to measure the first run only

these functions update their input by reference, so subsequent runs will use the already-processed data.table, this biasing the results.

> When benchmarking `set*` functions it makes sense to measure the first run only. These functions update their input by reference, so subsequent runs will use already-processed `data.table`, biasing the results. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When benchmarking `set*` functions it only makes sense to measure the first run. These functions update their input by reference, so subsequent runs will use already-processed `data.table`, biasing the results. 
```

Protecting your `data.table` from being updated by reference operations can be achieved using `copy` or `data.table:::shallow` functions. Be aware `copy` might be very expensive as it needs to duplicate whole object. It is unlikely we want to include duplication time in time of the actual task we are benchmarking.

# try to benchmark atomic processes

If your benchmark is meant to be published it will be much more insightful if you will split it to measure time of atomic processes. This way your readers can see how much time was spent on reading data from source, cleaning, actual transformation, exporting results.

> Of course if your benchmark is meant to present _full workflow_ then it perfectly makes sense to present total timing, still splitting timings might give good insight into bottlenecks in such workflow.

Reviewer: to present an end-to-end workflow, then it makes perfect sense to present the overall timing. Nevertheless, separating out timing of individual steps is useful for understanding which steps are the main bottlenecks of a workflow.

> There are another cases when it might not be desired, for example when benchmarking _reading csv_, followed by _grouping_. R requires populating _R's global string cache_ which adds extra overhead when importing character data to R session. On the other hand _global string cache_ might speed up processes like _grouping_. In such cases when comparing R to other languages it might be useful to include total timing.

Reviewer: There are other cases when  it might not be desirable

reading a csv

character data to an R session. On the other hand, the

> There are another cases when it might not be desirable, for example when _reading a csv_, followed by _grouping_. R requires populating _R's global string cache_ which adds extra overhead when importing character data to an R session. On the other hand, the _global string cache_ might speed up processes like _grouping_. In such cases when comparing R to other languages it might be useful to include total timing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are other cases when it might not be desirable, for example when _reading a csv_, followed by _grouping_. R requires populating _R's global string cache_ which adds extra overhead when importing character data to an R session. On the other hand, the _global string cache_ might speed up processes like _grouping_. In such cases when comparing R to other languages it might be useful to include total timing.
```

# avoid class coercion

> Unless this is what you truly want to measure you should prepare input objects for every tool you are benchmarking in expected class.

Reviewer: prepare input objects of the expected class for every tool you are benchmarking.

# avoid `microbenchmark(..., times=100)`

> Repeating benchmarking many times usually does not fit well for data processing tools. Of course, it perfectly makes sense for more atomic calculations. It does not well represent use case for common data processing tasks, which rather consists of batches sequentially provided transformations, each run once.

Reviewer: Repeating a benchmark many times

it makes perfect sense for more atomic calculations, but this is not a good representation of the common use case of data processing tasks, which consists of batches of

options(datatable.optimize=3L)
```
`options(datatable.optimize=2L)` will turn off optimization of subsets completely, while `options(datatable.optimize=3L)` will switch it back on.

> Those options affect many more optimizations and thus should not be used when only control of index is needed. Read more in `?datatable.optimize`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Those options affect many more optimizations and thus should not be used when only control of indices is needed. Read more in `?datatable.optimize`.
```

# _by reference_ operations

> When benchmarking `set*` functions it only makes sense to measure the first run. These functions update their input by reference, so subsequent runs will use already-processed `data.table`, biasing the results. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When benchmarking `set*` functions it only makes sense to measure the first run. These functions update their input by reference, so subsequent runs will use the already-processed `data.table`, biasing the results. 
```

Protecting your `data.table` from being updated by reference operations can be achieved using `copy` or `data.table:::shallow` functions. Be aware `copy` might be very expensive as it needs to duplicate whole object. It is unlikely we want to include duplication time in time of the actual task we are benchmarking.

# try to benchmark atomic processes

If your benchmark is meant to be published it will be much more insightful if you will split it to measure time of atomic processes. This way your readers can see how much time was spent on reading data from source, cleaning, actual transformation, exporting results.
Of course if your benchmark is meant to present to present an _end-to-end workflow_, then it makes perfect sense to present the overall timing. Nevertheless, separating out timing of individual steps is useful for understanding which steps are the main bottlenecks of a workflow.

> There are other cases when it might not be desirable, for example when _reading a csv_, followed by _grouping_. R requires populating _R's global string cache_ which adds extra overhead when importing character data to an R session. On the other hand, the _global string cache_ might speed up processes like _grouping_. In such cases when comparing R to other languages it might be useful to include total timing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are other cases when atomic benchmarking might not be desirable, for example when _reading a csv_, followed by _grouping_. R requires populating _R's global string cache_ which adds extra overhead when importing character data to an R session. On the other hand, the _global string cache_ might speed up processes like _grouping_. In such cases when comparing R to other languages it might be useful to include total timing.
```

# avoid class coercion

Unless this is what you truly want to measure you should prepare input objects of the expected class for every tool you are benchmarking.

# avoid `microbenchmark(..., times=100)`

> Repeating a benchmark many times usually does not fit well for data processing tools. Of course, it makes perfect sense for more atomic calculations, but thus is not a good representation of the common use case of data processing tasks, which consist of batches of sequentially provided transformations, each run once.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Repeating a benchmark many times usually does not give the clearest picture for data processing tools. Of course, it makes perfect sense for more atomic calculations, but this is not a good representation of the most common way these tools will actually be used, namely for data processing tasks, which consist of batches of sequentially provided transformations, each run once.
```

# multithreaded processing

> One of the main factor that is likely to impact timings is a number of threads in your machine. In recent versions of `data.table` some functions have been parallelized.

Reviewer: main factors

the number of threads

> One of the main factors that is likely to impact timings is a number of threads in your machine. In recent versions of `data.table` some functions have been parallelized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the main factors that is likely to impact timings is the number of threads in your machine. In recent versions of `data.table`, some functions have been parallelized.
```

# multithreaded processing

> One of the main factors that is likely to impact timings is the number of threads in your machine. In recent versions of `data.table`, some functions have been parallelized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the main factors that is likely to impact timings is the number of threads available to your R session. In recent versions of `data.table`, some functions are parallelized.
```
